#### MM 11



**<u>Question 1</u>**

---

Figure 1.16, in section 1.7 - The Power Wall, displays the frequency and power  as from 1982 and until 2012 (8 generations of Intel processors).

Note that until 2004 there was a steady increase in frequency and power.

1. What is the reason for the decline in power starting at 2004?

2. Until 2004 both power and frequency had increased, however frequency growth rate was much faster. What was the reason for the difference?
3. What factors may influence processors frequency?

<u>Answer</u>

1. A key factor for enhancing processors performance was the increment of transistors per chip. The growing number of transistors allowed processors designers to introduce new complex and advanced architectures, which yield faster execution times. 

   With the growing number of transistors, the power consumption increased as well. The High power consumption exposed a basic flaw in the processor substance, which is the meltdown of silicon under high temperatures.

   As long as processors designers were able to cope with the increasing power consumption, processors performance steadily improved. However, 2004 was the first year were the new designs failed to yield substantial performance improvements, due to the high thresholds of power consumption.

   In essence, 2004 was the year were processor designers had hit the "Power Wall". Meaning, they failed to successfully design efficient processor with new, higher, thresholds of power consumption.

2. Technological improvements continuously lowered the voltage thresholds in processors architects. Since low voltage requires less power, the general raise in power was restrained.

3. - High frequency rises power consumption, which then yields more hit. Therefore higher frequency will mandate more cooling. Thus, frequency is bound by cooling measures capacity.
   - Advancements in optimization techniques may introduce more complex architectures, which requires longer cycles. Since frequency is directly correlated to cycle time, it may be affected by this.





**<u>Question 2</u>**

---

Let P1, P2 be two processors with the same instruction set.

Their instruction set is partitioned into 4 different groups, A, B, C and D. We know:

|      | Clock Rate | A CPI | B CPI | C CPI | D CPI |
| ---- | ---------- | ----- | ----- | ----- | ----- |
| P1   | 1.2GHz     | 1     | 2     | 2     | 3     |
| P2   | 1.5GHz     | 2     | 4     | 2     | 3     |

1. In the sense of instructions per second, what is the fastest series of instruction for P1 and P2 possible?

2. Let T be some arbitrary program, comprised of instruction from A,B,C,D.

   Say that the groups of instructions in T from B, C and D are equally represented, and the group of instructions in T from A is double the size of the others.

   Which processor will run T faster? What is the MIPS rate?

3.  Let  V be some arbitrary program, comprised of instruction from A,B,C,D.

   Say that the groups of instructions in V from A, B and C are equally represented, and the group of instructions in T from D is double the size of the others.

   Which processor will run V faster? What is the MIPS rate?

   

<u>Answer</u>

1. MIPS (million instruction per second) is given by:
   $$
   MIPS = \frac{Clock \space Rate}{CPI\times 10^6}
   $$
   

   Group A has the lowest CPI for P1, therefore executing instruction of group A will yield the highest MIPS for P1, which is:
   $$
   Max \space MIPS \space P1 = \frac{1.2\times10^9}{1\times 10^6}=1.2\times 10^3
   $$
   Similarly, taking the lowest CPI value for P2 (e.g C CPI), we have:
   $$
   Max \space MIPS \space P2 = \frac{1.5\times10^9}{2\times 10^6}=0.75\times 10^3
   $$
   Therefore, P1 is faster than P2 in MIPS metric.

   

2. Denote $T$ the set of instructions from T, and:

   $A_T=\{x\in T \space | \space x \in $ A $ \}$.

   $B_T=\{x\in T \space | \space x \in $ B $ \}$.

   $C_T=\{x\in T \space | \space x \in $ C $ \}$.

   $D_T=\{x\in T \space | \space x \in $ D $ \}$.

   Execution Time = Instruction Count x CPI / Clock Rate.

   P1 Execution Time =  $(|A_T| \times 1 + |B_T| \times 2 + |C_T| \times2 + |D_T|\times 3)$ / 1.2 GHz

   ​								  = $\frac{(9\times|D_T|)}{1.2GHz}=7.5\times 10^{-9} \times|D_T|$

   P2 Execution Time =  $(|A_T| \times 2 + |B_T| \times 4 + |C_T| \times 2 + |D_T|\times 3)$ / 1.5 GHz

   ​								  = $\frac{(13\times|D_T|)}{1.5GHz}=8\frac{2}{3}\times 10^{-9} \times |D_T|$

   Therefore P1 runs T faster then P2.

   Acceleration rate = $\frac{P2 \space Execution \space Time}{P1 \space Execution \space Time} = \frac{8\frac{2}{3}}{7.5}\cong 1.1555$.

3. Denote $V$ the set of instructions from V, and:

   $A_V=\{x\in V \space | \space x \in $ A $ \}$.

   $B_V=\{x\in V \space | \space x \in $ B $ \}$.

   $C_V=\{x\in V \space | \space x \in $ C $ \}$.

   $D_V=\{x\in V \space | \space x \in $ D $ \}$.

   P1 Execution Time =  $(|A_V| \times 1 + |B_V| \times 2 + |C_V| \times2 + |D_V|\times 3)$ / 1.2 GHz 

   ​								  = $\frac{(11\times|A_V|)}{1.2GHz}=9\frac{1}{6}\times 10^{-9} \times|A_V|$

   P2 Execution Time =  $(|A_V| \times 2 + |B_V| \times 4 + |C_V| \times 2 + |D_V|\times 3)$ / 1.5 GHz

   ​								  = $\frac{(14\times|A_V|)}{1.5GHz}=9\frac{1}{3}\times 10^{-9} \times |A_V|$

   Therefore P1 runs V faster than P2.

   Acceleration rate = $\frac{P2 \space Execution \space Time}{P1 \space Execution \space Time} = \frac{9\frac{2}{3}}{9 \frac{1}{3}}\cong 1.035$.





**<u>Question 3</u>**

---

P1 and P2 are to processors running some program T. The instructions are partitioned to groups A,B,C,D.

P1 works at 3.5GHz, and P2 works at 4.0GHz.

For the program T, and A,B,C,D instructions, we have:

| P1        | A    | B    | C    | D    |
| --------- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| CPI       | 2    | 3    | 3    | 5    |
| Frequency | 45%  | 25%  | 25%  | %5   |

| P2        | A    | B    | C    | D    |
| --------- | ---- | ---- | ---- | ---- |
| CPI       | 2    | 2    | 4    | 5    |
| Frequency | 45%  | 25%  | 25%  | %5   |



1. What is the CPI of each processor?
2. What is the MIPS of each processor?
3. How much faster is P2 compared to P1?
4. What is the CPI of P1new?
5. How much faster is P1new compared to P1?
6. Can we combine the improved hardware and new compiler to get a better processor - P2new? How much faster will P2new be compared to P1?

<u>Answer</u>

1. The average CPI is given by the taking the proportional CPI each instruction group.

   P1 CPI = $2\times0.45 + 3\times0.25 + 3\times0.25 + 5\times0.05=2.65$

   P2 CPI = $2\times0.45 + 2\times0.25 + 4\times0.25 + 5\times0.05=2.65$

2. The number of instructions per second is given by - (Instructions per Cycle) x (Cycles per Second).

   P1_MIPS = $\frac{Clock \space Rate}{CPI \times 10^6} = \frac{3.5GHz}{2.65\times 10^9}\cong1.3207MIPS$.

   P2_MIPS = $\frac{Clock \space Rate}{CPI \times 10^6} = \frac{4.0GHz}{2.65\times 10^9}\cong1.5094MIPS$.

3. Since P1 and P2 have the same CPI values, we can deduce the result by considering the MIPS values alone. Then, P2 is $\frac{4}{3.5}\cong 1.1428$ times faster than P1.

4. We have changed the proportions of instructions executed from A,B,C,D.

   In total, we have decreased the amount of instructions to 84.75%. And the new proportional amounts are:

   | Inst. | Calc          | Freq   |
   | ----- | ------------- | ------ |
   | A     | 0.9x45/84.7   | 0.4778 |
   | B     | 0.8x25/84.75  | 0.2359 |
   | C     | 0.85x25/84.75 | 0.2507 |
   | D     | 0.6x5/84.75   | 0.0353 |

   Then, P1New_CPI = $0.4778 \times 2 + 0.2359 \times 3 + 0.2507 \times 3 + 0.0353 \times 5=2.5919$.

   

5. In general, Execution Time = Instruction Count x CPI / Clock Rate.

   If $L = Instructions \space Executed \space by \space P1$, then:

   P1 Time = $|L| \times 2.65 \times \frac{1}{3.5GHz}$.

   P1New Time = $|L|\cdot \frac{84.75}{100} \times 2.5919 \times \frac{1}{3.5GHz}$.

   Therefore P1New is $\frac{2.65}{0.8475 \times 2.5915}=1.1923$ times faster than P1.

